alright I'm here today to demonstrate to
you how a shipwright like myself might
be able to identify the difference
between red oak and white oak when
purchasing a supply of oak to build a
boat now
I've got some red oak over here in a
tray this piece of red oak is in a pool
of water and this piece of red oak is in
a pool of denatured alcohol now I'm
going to go back to that in a little
while and I've got another demonstration
set up in front of me here and I've got
some oak to my right here this row of
oak is white oak and this row of oak is
red oak you're going to be able to tell
the difference immediately when I
demonstrate this and I just like to tell
you some of the problems using red oak
in bulwark it soaks up a tremendous
amount of water because it's very porous
between the annual rings between the
growth rings the porosity is actually
continuous like straws from one end of
the tree to the other so it soaks up
water very very fast and large volumes
of water so in a boat it can soak fresh
water in from the top and create fresh
water rot or a concrete so saltwater in
from the bottom now with the induction
of DC current into the salt water it can
break down the salt and that causes
tremendous problems of the wood and I'm
going to go into that a little bit later
and at this point I'm going to show you
this little demonstration on how you
identify the difference between the two
so I'm going to pick up two pieces of
this oak over here on the right one is
going to be a piece of red oak and one
is going to be a piece of white oak I'm
going to dip them into this alcohol and
you're going to see that the alcohol
will soak up through the red oak almost
immediately and appear on the top or
what you can see going on here is the
alcohol is starting to appear on the top
of this piece of wood right here right
away now you see a little bit of
capillary action over here on this piece
around the outside but that is just on
the outside and then you see a little
bit of alcohol appearing right here but
that's in a check that check is on one
of the medullary rays at a 90 degrees to
the annual rings but you don't see any
alcohol coming up in between the growth
rings where you see it here just all
over the place so this red oak is
continuous pour it's like straws going
from one end of the wood to the other
and the porosity in between annual rings
and the white oak is kind of like bamboo
it's segmented so it blocks that
transfer of that capillary action this
is what's going on over here is
capillary action and in this one the
capillary action is certainly less much
less now I've lowered in two more pieces
of oak the oak on my right is no Weejun
oak from an 8 meter that I own out of
the floor timbers and oak on the left
was sold as Danish white oak but I'm not
so sure that it's white oak because look
at it soak in that alcohol to the
surface to me that's a species of red
oak now white oak is used for liquid
barrels like whiskey barrels because the
whiskey stays in the barrel and red oak
is only used for grain if you use the
red oak barrel for whiskey the whiskey
would be out on the floor in no time and
that would be a problem now I've put two
more pieces of oak into the alcohol and
I think you'll be able to tell quite
easily which one is red oak and which
one is white oak look at the alcohol
starting to appear on the surface of
this piece right here the porosity is so
great that the alcohol just sucks right
up to the top with capillary action in
no time flat you can actually see the
medullary rays appear in very much
before your very eyes here those are
emanate from the center of the tree 90
degrees to the annual rings and all the
checking always appears on the medullary
raisin oak and every kind of oak the
appearance of the medullary Ray's does
not necessarily tell you whether it's
red or white oak this being a piece of
red oak has got medullary rays in it and
so also does a white oak it's very hard
to see them right here maybe in the
camera but they're in here 90 degrees to
the annual ring is it well now obviously
this piece here doesn't have any alcohol
appearing on the surface it's got a
little bit of capillary action coming up
around the outside but the center isn't
sucked off any alcohol whatsoever now
that is the demonstration that you need
to perform that is the acid test right
there between red and white oak and now
we're going to go over to this other
little demonstration over here now this
is kind of going to speak volumes to you
about how much water a piece of oak just
this size can hold now I'm going to pick
it up and put my mouth against this end
of it and blow air in and you're going
to see the alcohol just dropping right
out of the bottom
now isn't that something now I guarantee
you I didn't have any alcohol in my
mouth that was all contained in that
piece of oak and that's the problem with
red oak right there
now when salt water soaks up into red
oak and if the red oak is sticking out
of the water what happens is as the salt
water gets above the water line it
starts to dry out at the top and it
leaves the salt behind it's like a
desalination plant and then as the water
dries out well it soaks up some more
water and that dries out at the top too
and the volume of salt retains into the
oak and it builds and builds and builds
as a soaks and dries and soaks and dries
and the content of salt just gets to be
so much that with the induction of DC
current DC current is conducted by the
salt water the ions in the salt conduct
the electricity and it breaks down the
salt into hydrochloric acid and solution
with water and sodium hydroxide now
sodium hydroxide is lye
it pretty much burns up anything you put
in it whether it's metal wood skin or
otherwise you don't want it in your vote
you